Charm Upgrade documentation (#881)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/charm/howto/upgrade-minor.md

# How to Upgrade {{product}} to the next minor revision

It is recommended that you keep your Kubernetes deployment
updated to the latest available stable version. You should

> also update the other applications which make up Kubernetes.

Reviewer: I would remove the second sentence and rephrase, or specify what other applications make up Kubernetes.

Author: thanks @eaudetcobello i'm opened to rewording this.  I guess i could list possible other charm integrations here `ceph-csi`, `cinder-csi`, `openstack-integrator` but there's like 60 charms and i'd rather not list them all.

As with all upgrades, there is a possibility that there may be
unforeseen difficulties. It is highly recommended that you make
a backup of any important data, including any running workloads.
For more details on creating backups, see the separate
[docs on backups][backup-restore].

You should also make sure:

* The machine from which you will perform the backup has sufficient
  internet access to retrieve updated software
* Your cluster is running normally
* Your Juju client and controller/models are running the same,
  stable version of Juju (see the [Juju docs][juju-docs])
* You read the [Upgrade notes][upgrade-notes] to see if any
  caveats apply to the versions you are upgrading to/from
* You read the [Upstream release notes][upstream-notes] for details
  of Kubernetes deprecation notices and API changes that may impact
  your workloads

It is also important to understand that Kubernetes will only 
upgrade and if necessary migrate, components relating specifically
to elements of Kubernetes installed and configured as part of Kubernetes.
This may not include any customized configuration of Kubernetes,
or user generated objects (e.g. storage classes) or deployments which

> rely on deprecated APIs.

Author: maybe so.  I'm forking the instructions here
https://ubuntu.com/kubernetes/docs/upgrading

Whats good for the goose i'd hoped would be good for the gander

> rely on deprecated APIs.

Author: other integrations like: 
* ceph-csi
* cinder-csi
* openstack-cloud-controller-manager

none of these get upgraded when you update the k8s and k8s-worker.  This statement is here for that reason

> rely on deprecated APIs.

Author: Similarly -- if someone has "kubelet-extra-args" set on their application.  And those args for kubelet are deprecated -- we aren't magically migrating them.

deployed in your models. To see if the `k8s` or `k8s-worker` charms 
can be upgraded, set with the following:

```sh
juju status --format=json | \
   jq '.applications | 
        to_entries[] | {
           application: .key,
           "charm-name": .value["charm-name"],
           "charm-channel": .value["charm-channel"],
           "charm-rev": .value["charm-rev"],
           "can-upgrade-to": .value["can-upgrade-to"]
        }'
```

This will output list of applications in the model:
* the name of the application
* the charm used by the application
* the kubernetes channel this charm follows
* the current charm revision
* the next potential charm revision

If the `can-upgrade-to` revision is empty, you are done, there's no
upgrade currently available on this charm channel.

### The pre-upgrade-check

Before running an upgrade, we should check that the cluster is 
steady and ready for upgrade. The charm will perform checks 
necessary to confirm the cluster is in safe working order before
upgrading.

```sh
$ juju run k8s/leader pre-upgrade-check           
Running operation 3 with 1 task
  - task 4 on unit-k8s-1

Waiting for task 4...
$ 
```

> If no error appears, the `pre-upgrade-check` completed successfully

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no error appears, the `pre-upgrade-check` completed successfully.
```

on the application's charm channel to upgrade each unit. The charm code
will be simultaneously replaced on each unit, then the kubernetes snap
will be updated unit-by-unit finishing with the juju leader unit for the 
application.

After the `k8s-worker` charm is upgraded, the application `Version` from `juju status`
will reflect the version of the worker nodes making up the cluster.

```{note} Repeat for every application using the k8s-worker charm if
multiple appear in the same model.
```

## Verify an Upgrade

Once an upgrade is complete and units settle, the output from:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
```sh
juju status
```
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
... should indicate that all units are active and the correct
version of **Kubernetes** is running.

It is recommended that you run a [cluster validation][cluster-validation]
to ensure that the cluster is fully functional.

<!-- LINKS -->

[backup-restore]:     ../../snap/howto/backup-restore.md
[cluster-validation]: ./validate.md
[juju-docs]:          https://juju.is/docs/juju/upgrade-models
[release-notes]:      ../reference/releases.md
[upgrade-notes]:      ../reference/upgrade-notes.md

> [upstream-notes]:     https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.31.md#deprecation

Author: it should be updated ever release.  is there a variable for which release this is?

> [upstream-notes]:     https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.31.md#deprecation

Reviewer 2: There is a {{version}} variable we have set up like {{product}} but I am not sure how it will integrate into a url

> [upstream-notes]:     https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.31.md#deprecation

Author: @nhennigan is there anything i can do to test it?

> [upstream-notes]:     https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.31.md#deprecation

Reviewer 2: So I tried to use {{version}} in the url but it wasn't working. There does seem to be a work around but it will take a new configuration file and I think that is out of the scope of this PR. I will add it to the backlog to see if it can be automated in the future

> [upstream-notes]:     https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.31.md#deprecation

Author: @nhennigan would you like me to update the link to point to 1.32 changelog?

[Upgrade Patch](upgrade-patch) instructions.

```{note} Only update the charm to the next minor version.
If the current `charm-channel` is `1.31/stable`, it's critical
to refresh to the `1.32/stable`. Skipping channels (eg 1.31 -> 1.33)
will result in the units blocking and indicating they cannot upgrade.
```

### The pre-upgrade-check

Before running an upgrade, we should check that the cluster is 
steady and ready for upgrade. The charm will perform checks 
necessary to confirm the cluster is in safe working order before
upgrading.

```sh
juju run k8s/leader pre-upgrade-check
```

If no error appears, the `pre-upgrade-check` completed successfully.

### Refreshing charm applications

#### Control Plane units (k8s)

Following the `pre-upgrade-check` update the control-plane nodes.

```sh
juju refresh k8s --channel ${NEXT_CHANNEL}
juju status k8s --watch 5s
```

The `refresh` command instructs the juju controller to follow a new
charm channel related to the kubernetes release and use the new charm
revision of the application's channel to upgrade each unit. The
charm code is simultaneously replaced on each unit, then the kubernetes

> snap is updated unit-by-unit, finishing with the juju leader unit for the

Author: ```suggestion
snap is updated unit-by-unit, starting with the juju leader unit for the
```

application.

After the `k8s` charm is upgraded, the application `Version` from `juju status`
will reflect the updated version of the control-plane nodes making up the cluster.

#### Worker units (k8s-worker)

After updating the control-plane applications, worker nodes may be upgraded
following running the `pre-upgrade-check`. 

```sh
juju run k8s-worker/leader pre-upgrade-check
juju refresh k8s-worker --channel ${NEXT_CHANNEL}
juju status k8s-worker --watch 5s
```

The `refresh` command instructs the juju controller to follow a new
charm channel related to the kubernetes release and use the new charm
revision of the application's channel to upgrade each unit. The
charm code is simultaneously replaced on each unit, then the kubernetes

> snap is updated unit-by-unit, finishing with the juju leader unit for the

Author: ```suggestion
snap is updated unit-by-unit, starting with the juju leader unit for the
```

# How to Upgrade {{product}} to the next minor revision

It is recommended that you keep your Kubernetes deployment
updated to the latest available stable version. You should
also update the other applications which make up Kubernetes.
Keeping up-to-date ensures you have the latest bug-fixes

> and security patches for smooth operation of your cluster.

Author: @louiseschmidtgen so much of this comes from original work by @evilnick .  I'm not sure why to patch the wording.  It's fine to accept your offerings -- just wanted you to know where it comes from. 

https://ubuntu.com/kubernetes/docs/upgrading

Unit        Workload  Agent  Machine  Public address  Ports     Message
k8s/0       active    idle   0        54.89.153.117   6443/tcp  Ready
k8s/1*      active    idle   1        3.238.230.3     6443/tcp  Ready
k8s/2       active    idle   2        34.229.202.243  6443/tcp  Ready

Machine  State    Address         Inst id              Base          AZ          Message
0        started  54.89.153.117   i-0b6fc845c28864913  ubuntu@22.04  us-east-1f  running
1        started  3.238.230.3     i-05439714c88bea35f  ubuntu@22.04  us-east-1f  running
2        started  34.229.202.243  i-07ecf97ed29860334  ubuntu@22.04  us-east-1c  running
```
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

## Before you begin

As with all upgrades, there is a possibility that there may be
unforeseen difficulties. It is highly recommended that you make
a backup of any important data, including any running workloads.
For more details on creating backups, see the separate
[docs on backups][backup-restore].

You should also make sure:

* The machine from which you will perform the backup has sufficient
  internet access to retrieve updated software

> * Your cluster is running normally
> * Your Juju client and controller/models are running the same,
>   stable version of Juju (see the [Juju docs][juju-docs])
> * You read the [Upgrade notes][upgrade-notes] to see if any
>   caveats apply to the versions you are upgrading to/from
> * You read the [Upstream release notes][upstream-notes] for details
>   of Kubernetes deprecation notices and API changes that may impact
>   your workloads

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The cluster is running normally
* The Juju client and controller/models are running the same,
  stable version of Juju (see the [Juju docs][juju-docs])
* You read the [Upgrade notes][upgrade-notes] to see if any
  caveats apply to the versions you are upgrading to/from
* You read the [Upstream release notes][upstream-notes] for details
  of Kubernetes deprecation notices and API changes that may impact
  your workloads
```
avoid you where possible.

Author: @nhennigan whatcha think? I was just following previous patterns.  Are we trying to avoid "you should"?

Reviewer 2: The difference is small but I think "you should" lends itself more to tutorials. How-to guides are more direct so I would implement Louise's changes.

It is also important to understand that Kubernetes will only 
upgrade and if necessary migrate, components relating specifically
to elements of Kubernetes installed and configured as part of Kubernetes.
This may not include any customized configuration of Kubernetes,
or user generated objects (e.g. storage classes) or deployments which

> rely on deprecated APIs.

Reviewer 3: Should we make this a note?

## Specific upgrade instructions

### Deciding if an upgrade is available

> Juju will contact charmhub daily to find new revisions of charms
> deployed in your models. To see if the `k8s` or `k8s-worker` charms 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Juju synchronizes daily with charmhub to find new revisions of charms
deployed in your models. To see if the `k8s` or `k8s-worker` charms 
```
Let's add a link for charmhub.

> can be upgraded, set with the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can be upgraded, execute the following:
```

```sh
juju status --format=json | \
   jq '.applications | 
        to_entries[] | {
           application: .key,
           "charm-name": .value["charm-name"],
           "charm-channel": .value["charm-channel"],
           "charm-rev": .value["charm-rev"],
           "can-upgrade-to": .value["can-upgrade-to"]
        }'
```

> This will output list of applications in the model:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will output a list of applications in the model:
```

* the name of the application (ex. `k8s`)
* the charm used by the application (ex. `k8s`)
* the kubernetes channel this charm follows (ex. `1.31/stable`)
* the current charm revision  (ex. `1001`)
* the next potential charm revision (ex. `ch:amd64/k8s-1002`)

If the `can-upgrade-to` revision is `null`, you are at the most
stable release in this channel and you should continue with the
[Pre Upgrade Check](#the-pre-upgrade-check).

> If the `can-upgrade-to` revision is non-null, continue with the
> [Upgrade Patch](upgrade-patch) instructions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Otherwise, continue with the
[Upgrade Patch](upgrade-patch) instructions.
```

```{caution} Only update the charm to the next minor version.
If the current `charm-channel` is `1.31/stable`, it's critical
to refresh to the `1.32/stable`. Skipping channels (eg 1.31 -> 1.33)

> will result in the units blocking and indicating they cannot upgrade.

Reviewer 3: How about a link to upstream version skew policy?

```

### The pre-upgrade-check

> Before running an upgrade, we should check that the cluster is 
> steady and ready for upgrade. The charm will perform checks 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before running an upgrade, confirm that the cluster is 
steady and ready for upgrade. The charm will perform checks 
```

necessary to confirm the cluster is in safe working order before
upgrading.

```sh
juju run k8s/leader pre-upgrade-check
```

If no error appears, the `pre-upgrade-check` completed successfully.

### Refreshing charm applications

#### Control Plane units (k8s)

Following the `pre-upgrade-check` update the control-plane nodes.

```sh
juju refresh k8s --channel ${NEXT_CHANNEL}
juju status k8s --watch 5s
```

The `refresh` command instructs the juju controller to follow a new
charm channel related to the Kubernetes release and use the new charm
revision of the application's channel to upgrade each unit. The
charm code is simultaneously replaced on each unit, then the `k8s`
snap is updated unit-by-unit, starting with the Juju leader unit for the

> application.

Reviewer 3: Can we add a sentence on HA during the upgrade please?

Author: Sorry, what are you looking for specifically related to HA on the upgrade?

Reviewer 3: An assurance for the user that the upgrade does not affect HA.

Author: Gotcha.  Thanks @louiseschmidtgen

During the upgrade process, the application status message and the `k8s` leader
unit message will display the current progress, listing the `k8s` and
`k8s-worker` units still pending upgrades.
After the `k8s` charm is upgraded, the application `Version` from `juju status`
will reflect the updated version of the control-plane nodes making up the cluster.

#### Worker units (k8s-worker)

After updating the control-plane applications, worker nodes may be upgraded

> following running the `pre-upgrade-check`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
after running the `pre-upgrade-check`. 
```

```sh
juju run k8s-worker/leader pre-upgrade-check
juju refresh k8s-worker --channel ${NEXT_CHANNEL}
juju status k8s-worker --watch 5s
```

The `refresh` command instructs the juju controller to follow a new
charm channel related to the Kubernetes release and use the new charm
revision of the application's channel to upgrade each unit. The
charm code is simultaneously replaced on each unit, then the `k8s`
snap is updated unit-by-unit, starting with the Juju leader unit for the
application.

After the `k8s-worker` charm is upgraded, the application `Version` from `juju status`
will reflect the updated version of the worker nodes making up the cluster.

> ```{note} Repeat for every application using the k8s-worker charm if

Reviewer 3: Can we be more precise here please? What are we repeating and what appears multiple times?

multiple appear in the same model.
```

## Verify an Upgrade

> Once an upgrade is complete and units settle, the output from:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once an upgrade is complete and units settle, confirm the successful upgrade by running:
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
```sh
juju status
```
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

> ... should indicate that all units are active and the correct

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
... the output should indicate that all units are active and the correct
```

version of **Kubernetes** is running.

> It is recommended that you run a [cluster validation][cluster-validation]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please proceed to run a [cluster validation][cluster-validation]
```

or non-built-in generated objects (e.g. storage classes) or deployments which
rely on deprecated APIs.

## Specific upgrade instructions

### Deciding if an upgrade is available

Juju will contact [charmhub] daily to find new revisions of charms
deployed in your models. To see if the `k8s` or `k8s-worker` charms 
can be upgraded, set with the following:

```sh
juju status --format=json | \
   jq '.applications | 
        to_entries[] | {
           application: .key,
           "charm-name": .value["charm-name"],
           "charm-channel": .value["charm-channel"],
           "charm-rev": .value["charm-rev"],
           "can-upgrade-to": .value["can-upgrade-to"]
        }'
```

This outputs a list of applications in the model:
* the name of the application (ex. `k8s`)
* the charm used by the application (ex. `k8s`)
* the kubernetes channel this charm follows (ex. `1.31/stable`)
* the current charm revision  (ex. `1001`)
* the next potential charm revision (ex. `ch:amd64/k8s-1002`)

If the `can-upgrade-to` revision is `null`, you are at the most
stable release in this channel and you should continue with the
[Pre Upgrade Check](#the-pre-upgrade-check).

> Otherwise, continue with the [Upgrade Patch](upgrade-patch) instructions.

Reviewer 2: I am a bit confused to the logic here. Am I right in saying:
 If there can-upgrade-to is null, we are on the latest stable release (up to date in our patches ) in our channel and we can go to to the next channel with the upgrade.
If the can-upgrade-to is not null, we want them to upgrade the patch first.

```{caution} Only update the charm to the next minor version.
If the current `charm-channel` is `1.31/stable`, it's critical
to refresh to the `1.32/stable`. Skipping channels (eg 1.31 -> 1.33)
will result in the units blocking and indicating they cannot upgrade.

See Kubernetes' [Version Skew Policy][version-skew-policy]
```

### The pre-upgrade-check

Before running an upgrade, check that the cluster is
steady and ready for upgrade. The charm will perform checks 
necessary to confirm the cluster is in safe working order before
upgrading.

```sh
juju run k8s/leader pre-upgrade-check
```

If no error appears, the `pre-upgrade-check` completed successfully.

### Refreshing charm applications

#### Control Plane units (k8s)

Following the `pre-upgrade-check` update the control-plane nodes.

```sh
juju refresh k8s --channel ${NEXT_CHANNEL}
juju status k8s --watch 5s
```

The `refresh` command instructs the juju controller to follow a new

> charm channel related to the Kubernetes release and use the new charm

Reviewer 2: This is quite a long sentence. Can we split into two? Suggestion:
The `refresh` command instructs the juju controller to follow a new
charm channel related to the Kubernetes release. It also instructs the juju controller to use the new charm revision of the application's channel to upgrade each unit.

charm code is simultaneously replaced on each unit, then the `k8s`
snap is updated unit-by-unit, starting with the Juju leader unit for the
application.

After the `k8s-worker` charm is upgraded, the application `Version` from `juju status`
will reflect the updated version of the worker nodes making up the cluster.

```{note} Repeat [this section](#worker-units-k8s-worker) for every
application using the k8s-worker charm, if multiple k8s-worker
applications appear in the same model.
```

## Verify an Upgrade

Once an upgrade is complete, confirm the successful upgrade by running:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
```sh
juju status
```
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

... should indicate that all units are active/idle and the correct
version of **Kubernetes** is listed in the application's **Version**

It is recommended that you run a [cluster validation][cluster-validation]
to ensure that the cluster is fully functional.

<!-- LINKS -->

[backup-restore]:      ../../snap/howto/backup-restore
[charmhub]:            https://charmhub.io/k8s
[cluster-validation]:  ./validate
[juju-docs]:           https://juju.is/docs/juju/upgrade-models
[release-notes]:       ../reference/releases

> [upgrade-notes]:       ../reference/upgrade-notes

Reviewer 2: Same as before
